doc: PM: clarifications and fixes (#1605)
NordicPlayground/fw-nrfconnect-nrf: scripts/partition_manager/partition_manager.rst

#################

Partition Manager is a Python script that sets the start address and size of all image partitions in a multi-image build context.

> When creating an application that requires child images (for example, a bootloader), you can configure Partition Manager to control where the images are placed in flash memory.

Reviewer: Should we drop `memory`, and simply write `the images are placed in flash.` ?

Reviewer 2: No, "flash memory" is more precise and easier to understand.

Overview
********

> The Partition Manager script reads configuration files, each of which is named :file:`pm.yml`.

Author: The suggested change reads a bit strangely to me. How about:

```
The Partition Manager script reads configuration files named :file:`pm.yml`.
```

> The Partition Manager script reads configuration files, each of which is named :file:`pm.yml`.

Reviewer 2: ok

> Each configuration file names partitions and constrains their placement on flash.

Author: Without this PR, it's actually not clearly stated that part of the job of these files is to give partitions a name, so I'm deliberately using the word "names" here to make that more clear.

I will try to reword this a bit without losing that.

> Partition manager allocates a start address and size to each partition in a way that satisfies these constraints.

Author: Thanks for the correction! How about:

```
Each configuration file names partitions and constrains their size and placement on flash.
Partition manager allocates a start address to each partition in a way that satisfies these constraints.
```

Sorry for the horizontal scrollbars; I guess they're due to our avoiding an 80-column rule.

> Partition manager allocates a start address and size to each partition in a way that satisfies these constraints.

Author: Will fix the capitalization.

Partition Manager is referred to without a definite article throughout this document, though, which makes sense, since it's a proper noun and thus doesn't need it. Examples:

- As output, Partition Manager creates a HEX file [...]
- Partition Manager may implicitly or explicitly assign a HEX file [...]
- Parition Manager stores all variables as target properties [...]
- For this purpose, Partition Manager provides static configuration [...]

> Partition manager allocates a start address and size to each partition in a way that satisfies these constraints.

Reviewer 3: Perfect

> Partition manager allocates a start address and size to each partition in a way that satisfies these constraints.

Reviewer 2: There are at least as many occurrences with "the", and this is how we usually do it for names like "Manager", "Client" or the like.

> Partition manager allocates a start address and size to each partition in a way that satisfies these constraints.

Author: Then I think there should be a separate commit which makes the style consistent, no?

> Partition manager allocates a start address and size to each partition in a way that satisfies these constraints.

Reviewer 2: Sure, makes sense to add a commit to fix it everywhere - but we shouldn't introduce wrong usage in new text.

> The Partition Manager allocates a start address to each partition in a way that satisfies these constraints.

Reviewer 4: For some partitions, the size is determined by Partition Manager.

```suggestion
The Partition Manager allocates a start address and size to each partition in a way that satisfies these constraints.
```

   The root application does not need to define a :file:`pm.yml` file, because its partition size and placement is implied by the size and placement of the child image partitions.
   If a root application defines a :file:`pm.yml` file, it is silently ignored.

Subsystems can also provide Partition Manager configuration files.
(Here, *subsystem* means a software component, like support for a file system.)
Subsystems cannot define image partitions.

> To add a Partition Manager configuration file for a subsystem, place the following line in the :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file for that software component:

Author: Sure, how about:

```
place the following line in its :file:`CMakeLists.txt` file (this is only required for subsystems, not application images)
```

.. code-block:: cmake

  add_partition_manager_config(pm.yml)

There are some limitations when multiple application images build the same subsystem code if it adds a Partition Manager configuration file in this way.

> In particular, partition definitions are global, and must be identical across calls to ``add_partition_manager_config()``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In particular, partition definitions are global and must be identical across calls to ``add_partition_manager_config()``.
```

> If the same partition is defined twice with different configurations, Partition Manager will fail.

Reviewer: It might not be clear to the reader which sub-systems that are defining a partition manager conf file.
And thus, it might be hard to know how to avoid making mistakes.

Should we reference the subsys that currently defines a `pm.yml` ?
Currently I find `subsys/settings/` and `subsys/fs` having a `pm.yml`

Reviewer 3: To me it is sufficient to name the function required. A simple search for this in your repo will show all subsystems which has a pm.yml. A list of subsystems that define pm.yml sounds like something that will quickly be incorrect as people adding pm.ymls to subsystems forget to update this list.

Reviewer 5: I agree with @hakonfam

.. _pm_yaml_format:

Configuration file format
=========================

A :file:`pm.yml` file contains partition definitions.
Each partition is defined as follows:

.. code-block:: yaml

   partition_name:
      option:
         option_values

*partition_name* is the name of the partition (for example, ``mcuboot``).
The following *option* and *option_values* are available:

placement: dict OR empty

>    This property specifies the placement of the partition relative to other partitions, the start or end of flash, or the root image ``app``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   This property specifies the placement of the partition relative to other partitions, to the start or end of flash, or to the root image ``app``.
```

         Ensure alignment of start or end of partition by specifying a dict with a ``start`` or ``end`` key respectively, where the value is the number of bytes to align to.
         If necessary, empty partitions are inserted in front of or behind the partition to ensure that the alignment is correct.
         Only one key can be specified.
         Partitions which directly or indirectly (through :ref:`spans <partition_manager_spans>`) share size with the ``app`` partitions can only be aligned if they are placed directly after the ``app`` partition.

.. _partition_manager_spans:

span: list OR span: dict OR span: string
   This property is used to define container partitions.
   Its value may be a list, dict, or string.

   Since this property is used to define container partitions, it cannot be used together with the ``placement`` property.

   If the value is a list, its elements are the names of the partitions that should be placed in the container:

   .. code-block:: yaml

      # This partition spans, or contains, partition_1 through partition_n,
      # in any order:
      container_partition_name:
        span: [partition_1, partition_2, ..., partition_n]

>    The list elements are interpreted as the set of potential partitions in the container, which the Partition Manager may place in flash in any order. For example, ``partition_2`` could be placed before ``partition_1``.

Reviewer 2: Should add a line break before the second sentence.

   Non-existent partitions are removed from the ``span`` list before processing, and partitions with empty ``span`` lists are removed altogether (unless filled by the :ref:`inside property <partition_manager_inside>`).

span: list OR dict: list
   If the value type is a list, this property lists which partitions this partition should span across.

   A string formatted value is interpreted as a single item list.
   Partitions with this property are container partitions.

   If the Partition Manager is forced to place a partition that is not declared in the ``span`` list between two partitions that are in the list, the configuration is unsatisfiable and therefore invalid.
   See :ref:`Span property example 1 <partition_manager_span_ex1>` for an example of an invalid configuration.

>    If the value is a dict with key ``one_of``, the semantics are equivalent to a list that contains the first existing partition in the ``one_of``-list:

Reviewer 2: This part has been updated in PR https://github.com/NordicPlayground/fw-nrfconnect-nrf/pull/1770
This seems to have been lost?

         Place the partition after the first existing partition in the list.

     Valid values in the lists are ``app``, ``start``, ``end``, or the name of any partition.

>      The value ``start`` refers to the flash device's start address.

Reviewer 2: The start address of the device's flash memory?

Author: Hmm, I'm using "flash" an adjective modifying "device", so how about:

```
[...] refers to the start address of the flash device's memory
```

Reviewer 2: So we are talking about a "flash device" (like a USB stick)?

Author: We are talking about a flash device, yes. The start address here is an attribute of the flash device from the perspective of the nRF SoC's CPU. In particular, it's the first address in the CPU's memory map which refers to data stored on the flash device.

Reviewer 2: ok

     The value ``end`` refers to its end address.
     It is not possible to place the partition after ``end`` or before ``start``.

      align: dict
         Ensure alignment of start or end of partition by specifying a dict with a ``start`` or ``end`` key respectively, where the value is the number of bytes to align to.
         If necessary, empty partitions are inserted in front of or behind the partition to ensure that the alignment is correct.
         Only one key can be specified.

>          Partitions which directly or indirectly (through :ref:`spans <partition_manager_spans>`) share size with the ``app`` partitions can only be aligned if they are placed directly after the ``app`` partition.

Reviewer 2: Is that ID defined somewhere?

Author: Yes, lower down.

Reviewer 2: Where? I can't find it when I search.

Author: You're right, sorry, I amended it out when I was writing this. Will fix.

>    An empty value is also permitted, like so:

Reviewer 3: PM does not support empty placement values. Instead it requires all partition to have a placement defined relative to some other partition. I will create a PR which adds a check for this, causing a runtime error if it finds an empty 'placement'.

Reviewer 3: https://github.com/NordicPlayground/fw-nrfconnect-nrf/pull/1606

Author: Thanks for that! Did you see my comment above?
https://github.com/NordicPlayground/fw-nrfconnect-nrf/pull/1605#discussion_r352927950

Any suggestions on how to fix the existing incorrect examples? `placement: {after: start}` or so?

Reviewer 3: I didn't catch the meaning of your comment. 

You proposal would resolve the issue.

>    An empty value is also permitted, like so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   An empty value is also permitted, for example:
```

   .. code-block:: yaml

>       mcuboot:

Author: Note this is copy/pasted from the span examples below, so if something about this example is incorrect, then the examples also seem to be incorrect and should be fixed.

        placement:

   An empty value means that there are no constraints on the placement of the partition.

span: list OR span: dict OR span: string
   This property is used to define container partitions.
   Its value may be a list, dict, or string.

   Since this property is used to define container partitions, it cannot be used together with the ``placement`` property.

>    If the value is a list, its elements are the names of the partitions which should be placed in the container:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   If the value is a list, its elements are the names of the partitions that should be placed in the container:
```

   .. code-block:: yaml

      # This partition spans, or contains, partition_1 through partition_n,
      # in any order:
      container_partition_name:
        span: [partition_1, partition_2, ..., partition_n]

>    The list elements are interpreted as the set of potential partitions in the container, which Partition Manager may place on flash in any order. For example, ``partition_2`` could be placed before ``partition_1``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The list elements are interpreted as the set of partitions in the container, which the Partition Manager may place in flash in any order. 
   For example, ``partition_2`` might be placed before ``partition_1``.
```

Author: I think the word "potential" is important.

This is not the exact set of partitions, because any partitions in the set which are not defined elsewhere are removed from the list before processing, as described by the next sentence.

Reviewer 2: ok

>    Non-existent partitions are removed from the ``span`` list before processing, and partitions with empty ``span`` lists are removed altogether (unless filled via the ``inside`` property described :ref:`below <partition_manager_inside>`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Non-existent partitions are removed from the ``span`` list before processing, and partitions with empty ``span`` lists are removed altogether (unless filled by the :ref:`inside property <partition_manager_inside>`).
```

   If Partition Manager is forced to place a partition that is not declared in the ``span`` list between two partitions that are in the list, the configuration is unsatisfiable and therefore invalid.

>    See :ref:`Span property example 1 <partition_manager_span_ex1>` for an example invalid configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   See :ref:`Span property example 1 <partition_manager_span_ex1>` for an example of an invalid configuration.
```

>    If the value is a dict with key ``one_of``, the semantics are equivalent to a list which contains the first existing partition in the ``one_of``-list:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   If the value is a dict with key ``one_of``, the semantics are equivalent to a list that contains the first existing partition in the ``one_of``-list:
```

   .. code-block:: yaml

      # If partition_1 is defined, this container spans just that partition.
      # Otherwise, if partition_2 is defined, it spans just that partition,
      # and so on:
      container_partition_name:
        span: {one_of: [partition_1, partition_2, ..., partition_n]}

   If the value is a string, it is interpreted as a list with one item:

   .. code-block:: yaml

      # The following examples are equivalent:

      container_partition_name:
        span: foo

      container_partition_name:
        span: [foo]

   .. note::
      You can specify configurations with an ambiguous ordering (see the following examples).

>       Different versions of the Partition Manager script may either produce different partition orders for such configurations, or fail to find a solution even if one is possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Different versions of the Partition Manager script might produce different partition orders for such configurations, or fail to find a solution even if one is possible.
```

Author: I'm using "may" to indicate a requirement level in the sense of [RFC2119](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2119), since that's a familiar engineering usage.

I'm not aware of standards documents which use "might" in the same way, so when I read this document, I wondered if this note was saying that there were problems with Partition Manager being unpredictable in an undesirable way. Changing to "may" makes it clearer to me personally that this ambiguity is by design, which I believe is the intent.

Should I really change "may" back to "might"?

I'm also not sure why "either" should be removed. Seems like a correct usage of "either / or": "either produce [...], or fail to find a solution". Is this a house style?

Reviewer 2: "May" is permission, "might" is possibility. So if you want to point out that it is allowed that different versions produce different results, "may" is correct. But I think you want to point out that it could happen that there are different results, and there it must be "might".

"Either" should be removed because it introduces two options - either A or B. But I'm pretty sure there's an option C here, namely that the different versions actually give the same result.

Author: I believe PM "may" (in the sense of permission produce different orderings or  fail to find a valid solution even if one exists as described here -- @hakonfam, can you confirm?

This is a point I find confusing, which I'm trying to make clearer with this patch. By switching to "may," I am explicitly trying to make the documentation say say that if that happens, it's not a bug.

I will drop "either" -- I see your point that it's usually (though I think [not always](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exclusive_or#Exclusive_%22or%22_in_English)) used as an exclusive-or.

         placement:
            after: [mcuboot]

      # However, the overall configuration is unsatisfiable:
      # foo requires order 2, while bar requires order 1.

      foo:
         span: [mcuboot, app]

      bar:
         span: [mcuboot, spm]

.. _partition_manager_inside:

inside: list
   This property is the inverse of ``span``.
   The name of the partition that specifies this property is added to the ``span`` list of the first existing container partition in the list.
   This property can be set for image or placeholder partitions.

   .. code-block:: yaml

>       :caption: Inside property example

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      :caption: "inside" property example
```

Reviewer 2: Why not just stick to the original wording?

Each :file:`pm.yml` file is preprocessed to resolve symbols from Kconfig and DTS.

> The following example shows a :file:`pm.yml` file for a stage zero bootloader partition named ``b0``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows a :file:`pm.yml` file for an immutable bootloader partition named ``b0``.
```

Author: How about:

```
The following example is taken from the :file:`pm.yml` file for an immutable bootloader application.
```

Looking at this again, I see that the fact that the partition's name is `b0` is already documented in a YAML comment.

Reviewer 2: You could actually link to the immutable bootloader then: :ref:`bootloader`
